Z80 Assembler Syntax
====================

__NOTE:__ Here "instruction" is the assembly mnemonic and "opcode" is the
binary value. The Mostek documentation sometimes reverses this.

References:
- [_Z80 Programming Manual V2.0_][pm20], Mostek, 1978-10.

Architecture
------------

### Registers

    general purpose  special purpose
    main  alternate     I   R
     A F    A'  F'      IX
     B C    B'  C'      IY
     D E    D'  E'      SP
     H L    H'  L'      PC

- Main and alternate may be exchanged for `AF` and `BC DE HL`.
- `I` (interrupt page address) stores the MSB of interrupt vector location
  when in mode 2. LSB is supplied by device on data bus. Can be used as a
  data register in modes 0 and 1.
- `R` (memory refresh): 7-bit counter incremented after every opcode fetch.
- `SP` grows down, points to current top of stack.

### Flags (F Register)

    7  S  sign              testable
    6  Z  zero              testable
    5  X  (unused)
    4  H  half-carry        used w/BCD
    3  X  (unused)
    2 P/V parity/overflow   testable
    1  N  add/subtract      used w/BCD
    0  C  carry             testable        also borrow flag

### Addressing Modes

All values listed are byte values. Direct/immediate always uses bare value;
indirect always surrounds value/register with `()`.

- Immediate: opcode, value. `LD A,12h`
- Extended immediate: opcode, LSB, MSB. `LD HL,3456h`
- Modified page zero: restart instruction, any of 8 locations.
- Relative: opcode, signed offset relative to next instr.
- Extended: opcode, address LSB, address MSB.
- Indexed: prefix, opcode, unsigned displacement added to IX/IY. `LD A,(IX+d)`
- Register: bits contained in opcode.
- Implied: specified by opcode.
- Register indirect: register is pointer. `LD A,(HL)`.
- Bit.
- Stack pointer. `PUSH`, `POP` only.

Notes:
- Indexed addressing provided to help w/relocatable code.


<!-------------------------------------------------------------------->
[pm20]: https://archive.org/details/bitsavers_mostekz80MrammingManualV2.0Oct1978_8991034
