Rigol DS1000Z Series (1054Z) Oscilloscope Notes
===============================================

### Preferences and Capture Settings

`Utility → System → Vertical Ref` determines whether vertical scale
zooms around `Ground` of signal (default) or `Center` of screen.

`Utility → System → Power Set` determines whether at power-up the
'scope starts with `Last` settings from before power-off (default) or
factory `Default` settings. The factory default settings (described in
detail on page 14-12 of the manual) can also be restored at any time
with `Storage → Default`.

Current settings can be saved and reloaded as "Setup" (`.stp`) files
in internal or USB storage via `Storage → Storage → Setups`. Note that
"Parameters"/"Param" (`.txt`) format also records setup and other
'scope information but cannot be reloaded.


UI Hints
--------

- To delete measurements created from the left-hand buttons, use
  `Measure → Clear → ItemX → Delete` to grey out the measurement; the
  greyed-out measurements will slowly be pushed off the screen as you
  add new measurements. The `Recover` item in that deepest menu will
  restore a measurement, allowing you to bring back ones used
  previously in the current session if you've cleared the screen of
  the bottom measurements for a while.
- To use vertical scale controls for the Math channel, you need to
  press `MATH` _twice_, to be not in the top level math menu but the
  "Math" menu below that..

Printing
--------

The print button will create a `DS1Z_QuickPrint#.png` file where `#` is the
lowest number starting from `1` that is not already on the USB disk. The
file will always dated 2014-11-01 21:00:00.

Triggering
----------

Triggering and trigger status display (at upper left):
- _Single_ waits for trigger condition, triggers once, and stops. (`STOP`)
- _Normal_ retriggers every time it sees the trigger condition, stopping
  when it doesn't see it. (`WAIT` and `T'D`)
- _Auto_ forces a trigger if it doesn't see a trigger condition. (`AUTO`
  and `T'D`) XXX How long does it scan before forcing?
- _Force_ button forces a single capture (except when stopped) continuing
  in that mode after.

Trigger coupling (Menu/Setting/Coupling), valid only with edge triggers,
can be set to DC/AC/LFR/HFR independently of the input coupling:
- `DC`
- `AC`: blocks all DC components, attenuates signals < 75 Hz.
- `LFR` (LF reject): blocks DC components, rejects LF < 75 kHz.
- `HFR` (HF reject): rejects high frequency components > 75 kHz.
