電気圧力鍋 - Electric Pressure Cooker
=====================================

Notes on the Toho Relicia [RLC-PC-02RF].
Manual: [取扱説明書]. Recipe book: [レシピブック].

This is a heating pot (鍋) with a 600 W element and a temperature sensor in
the base that can be pressure sealed. It probably does not have an
electronic pressure sensor but simply uses the pot base temperature to
determine whether the unit is "pressurised" (加圧) or not and the おもり
(weighted pressure release valve) to limit the pressure.

The manual indicates that all modes run at 33〜55 kPa (1.3× 〜 1.5× STP)
except ケーキ, which indicates no pressure because you're supposed to
leave the release weight open.

> [!CAUTION] This mostly runs at 135°–145°, well above the safe level for
> "microwave-safe" plastics; use glass/ceramic.

The weight of the internal pot (鍋) is 283 g (very close to small rice
cooker, 287 g).

#### Pressure Indicator and Release Weight

When closing the lid there is a pin that sticks out the back quite a ways
(~5mm) if the lid is not entirely locked closed, or only 1mm or less if it
is locked closed. (It does not stick out at all when detached.)

The red pin on the lid rises when pressure is too high to open. Wait for it
to fall (via cooling and slightly leakage through valve below) or use valve
below to release pressure. Even with pin down, pressure may still be
slightly above atmospheric.

The pressure valve is just a 73g poppet ("weight," おもり) seated over a
nozzle (vent stem) sticking out the top of the lid. In most positions
(including the one marked `○`) it rests on the seat, venting at ~55 kPa
internal pressure, but when pointing to either of the two "steam" (♨)
positions (or anywhere else) it's open, venting to near outside atmosphere.
Disable heating (press `保温/切`) before venting.

Pressure release techniques are:
- __NPR__ "Natural Pressure Release": Do nothing and wait for pin to go
  down. This is additional cooking time beyond 加温時間 though many recipes
  don't mention this.
- __QR__ "Quick Release": Turn the knob (careful per above/below) to
  release steam immediately, and then add more ingredients or decant.
  (Often the right choice for veggies, eggs, seafood, overcookables.)
- Cooling: drop a wet cloth over cooker to do a faster NPR; avoids massive
  spew when 鍋 has: a) lots of liquid still; b) foamy stuff like beans; c)
  large meat cuts (muscle fibres still under internal pressure and then
  tear, going from tender to stringy).

> [!CAUTION] The valve will spray heated liquids at any time: avoid
> unprotected hands/face/etc. near it. Especially with significant liquid
> (e.g., soup) inside, instead cool lid with a wet towel.

There is also a pot pressure sensor in the middle of the heating element
that will stop cooking at somehwere around 150g; this is effective only
when the lid is open and thus not pressing down the inner pot.

#### Standard Cooking Cycle

Load food, close pressure valve (except for ケーキ and open-lid modes; see
below), and press `メニュー` to select a specific food course (mode) or
`お好み` for generic pressure cooking mode.
- Repeated presses of `お好み` cycle through `P5`, `P10`, …, `P60` 加圧時間
  (minutes at pressure, see below).
- All settings can be changed in minute increments with the `+` and `-`
  within limits, 1-60 minutes for お好み or within a few minutes either
  side of the default for others. (Exception: ケーキ is always exactly 30
  minutes.)

After a moment or two of entry the pot enters 加熱 state and starts
heating. 加圧時間 can still be changed during this time.

* __加熱__ (heating): Raise temperature towards 145°. The mode determines
  when the switch to next state occurs; this is probably never if the lid
  is off and the temperature sits at not much more than 100°. (Boiling near
  dry, ~150g or less, will trigger the weight sensor shutoff.)
  - ご飯:(120°-145°): Reach 145°, stop heater and wait until 135° is
    reached, reheat to 145°, repeating this cycle twice, and then enter
    next state.
  - スープ, お粥（おかゆ）, 肉類（にくるい）: unclear. 
  - お好み: unclear, but suspect it's just reach a setpoint between 105°
    and 145° and then switch to next mode.
  - ケーキ: See below.

* __加圧__ (pressure cook): Timed hold at 145° for the 加圧時間 set above.
  - Some modes do a pressure cook at for a while during the 加熱 phase.
    (E.g., ご飯 at 135-145°.)
  - Unclear if all modes really hold at 145°; some imply a range of
    116°〜145°.
  - You won't normally reach this mode with the lid off as it won't hit the
    temperature setpoint to switch out of 加熱.

* __保温__ (warm): Maintain 80° (with lid open, 75°). Shut off with
  `保温／切` or shuts off automatically after 8h. (Also started stand-alone
  with `保温／切`.)

#### Non-pressure Cooking Cycles

* ケーキ: Lid on, pressure valve open. Basically a 30 min 145° oven,
  usually used for in-bowl cakes (butter the 鍋 first).
  - XXX current experiment: started this setting open with a litre of
    water; does it shut off after a half hour? A half hour after boiling?
    Or never reach 加圧 stage? So far (~40m) never does.

* Open-lid cooking (フタ開) as roughly a standard hot pot. Press `保温/切`
  to clear back to off mode, if necessary, then `お好み` (time setting
  doesn't matter) and stays in 加熱 mode indefinitely, never reaching 145°
  unless your food sticks to the the bottom. (600 W power keeps water at a
  medium boil.) Often used in final stage of cooking to reduce
  soup/sauce/whatever.

#### Experiments

* 300 ml water, お好み P05. Brings to a full boil after ~8m. Soon after
  needs weight to stop shut-off sensor. W/weight and another 5 minutes of
  full boil, still never switches from 加熱 to 加圧 mode.

* 1ℓ water, ケーキ. Starts in 加熱, brings to a near boil after ~30m; even
  after another 20m never comes to a full boil. Stays in 加熱 mode. Above,
  145° above wasn't a riotous boil, so not unexpected that 135° (-7%) is
  perceptibly less.

#### Manual Extracts

As an example of open cooking after initial pressure cooking, recipe 13:
ビーフシチュー (調理時間70分) gives meat `肉類` P15, wait for pin to drop,
veggies `お好み` P05, wait for pin, then remove lid, add roux, and without
lid `お好み` no time, and switch to warm when reduced: 8. デミグラスソースと
トマトケチャップを入れて塩・こしょうで味をととのえる。薄力粉とバターは
合わせてよく練り、少しずつ溶かし入れる。フタを開けたまま「お好み」ボタンを
押して、混ぜながらとろみがつくまで煮る。

That's the best clarity we have on the "lid open" instructions which are
otherwise (in the main manual) confusing:

フタを開けての調理について
本製品はフタを外した状態でも加熱調理することができます。カレーやシチューの
調理はルーを溶かす前の手順までを加圧(フタを閉めた状態)で行い、ルーを
溶かしてからは、フタを開けて加熱調理してください。
フタを開けての調理での各モードの設定温度は、保温モード75℃、ケーキモード
135℃、その他のモードで145℃です。
フタを開けた状態での動作例 (ご飯モードの場合):温度が145℃に達した後加熱を
一時停止→135℃で再加熱→2回繰り返し後、保圧状態に入り、カウントダウン開始。

Unclear why the example _here_ seems to be talking about the ご飯 mode case
of multiple setpoints before switching from 加熱 to 加圧時間 (which is what
gave us the caveats about the modes above in §"Standard Cooking Cycle"),
but maybe it's just Japanese salaryman siloing.



<!-------------------------------------------------------------------->
[取扱説明書]: https://toho-corporation.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/10/%E5%8F%96%E6%89%B1%E8%AA%AC%E6%98%8E%E6%9B%B8.pdf
[レシピブック]: https://toho-corporation.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/TOH_RLC-RSP141106ol-1.pdf
[RLC-PC-02RF]: https://toho-corporation.com/products/rlc-pc02rf/
