Intel 8255 Programmable Peripheral Interface (PPI)
==================================================

### Pinout

           ┌───∪───┐
       PA3 │ 1   40│ PA4
       PA2 │ 2   39│ PA5
       PA1 │ 3   38│ PA6
       PA0 │ 4   37│ PA7
       /RD │ 5   36│ /WR
       /CS │ 6   35│ RESET
       GND │ 7   34│ D0
        A0 │ 8   33│ D1
        A1 │ 9   32│ D2
       PC7 │10   31│ D3
       PC6 │11   30│ D4
       PC5 │12   29│ D5
       PC4 │13   28│ D6
       PC0 │14   27│ D7
       PC1 │15   26│ Vcc
       PC2 │16   25│ PB7
       PC3 │17   24│ PB6
       PB0 │18   23│ PB5
       PB1 │19   22│ PB4
       PB2 │20   21│ PB3
           └───────┘

The three ports and control word are addressed via `A1`,`A0`:

      An Register         pull      notes
      0  PA Port A data   up/down
      1  PB Port B data   up only
      2  PC Port C data   up only   upper/lower split is PCU/PCL
      3  CR Control word  -

Ports A and B ("group A" and "group B" in the datasheet) are unidirectional
(all bits are input or output) always operate in "I/O" mode:
reading/writing the register reads/sets the pins.

The 8255 operates in one of two modes, based on a bit in the control register:
- D₇=0: Bit Set/Reset (BSR) mode
- D₇=1: I/O mode:

XXX But the datasheet talks about modes 0, 1 and 2.

On `RESET` high all ports are set to input mode with all lines held high by
the pullups. On mode changes all output registers are reset.

Control Register Usage and Modes
--------------------------------

#### Port C Set/Reset Control

Instead of writing all port C bits to the PC register, you can instead use
a control command to set or reset an individual bit in port C. Write to CR:
- `0xxxBBBV`: `V`=value and `BBB`=bit number 0-7.

Reads of port C are always done via the PC register.

#### Mode 0: Basic Input/Output

Write to CR `100AU0BL` where `AUBL` are PA, PCU, PB and PCL direction
(0=out 1=in).

#### Mode 1: Strobed I/O

Can be used on either or both of ports A and B. Write to CR one of
- `1011dxxx`: Port A, d=direction (0=out 1=in)
- `1xxxx1dx`: Port B, d=direction (0=out 1=in)

Mode 1 input port C lines (port A control/port B control):
- PC₇, PC₆: free for user I/O (writes must use set/reset)
- PC₄/PC₂: `/STB` strobe input
- PC₅/PC₁: `IBF` input buffer loaded output; goes high when `/STB` goes low
  and goes back low when `/RD` input rises.
- PC₃/PC₀: `INTRA`/`INTRB` outputs. Rise when `/STB`=1 `IBF`=1 and
  `INTE`=1. Bit set/reset PC₄/PC₂ to enable/disable interrupts.

Mode 1 output port C lines (port A control/port B control):
- PC₇/PC₁: `/OBF` output buffer full; set on rising edge of `/WR` input.
- PC₆/PC₂: `/ACK`: drive low to indicate data accepted and reset `/OBF`.
- PC₃/PC₀: `INTRA`/`INTRB` outputs. Set when `/ACK`=1 `/OBF`=1 `INTE`=1.
  Bit set/reset PC₆/PC₂ to enable/disable interrupts.
- PC₅/PC₄: free for user I/O (writes must use set/reset)

#### Mode 2: Strobed Bidirectional Bus I/O

Port A only: Port A is bidrectional bus, 5 bits of control on port C.

Write to CR `11xxxbdc` where:
- `b`: Group B mode: 0=mode 0 1=mode 1
- `d`: Port B direction: 0=output 1=input
- `c`: Port C bits 2-0 direction: 0=output 1=input (Group B mode 0 only)

Handshaking signals are:
- PC₇: `/OBF`
- PC₆: `/ACK`
- PC₅: `IBF`
- PC₄: `/STB`
- PC₃: `INTRA` interrupt
- PC₂,PC₁,PC₀: I/O (Group B mode 0) or group B mode 1 handshaking


References
----------

- Wikipedia, [Intel 8255][wp].
- Intel, [82C55A Programmable Peripheral Interface][82c55a] datasheet. 1985-10.



<!-------------------------------------------------------------------->
[82c55a]: https://web.archive.org/web/20130611205002/https://download.intel.com/design/archives/periphrl/docs/23125604.pdf
[wp]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intel_8255
