Z80 Peripherals
===============

This is the standard set of peripherals that Zilog introduced along with
their Z80 processor. Many of them differ from the Intel peripheral chips
that perform similar functions.

[Z80 Family CPU Peripherals][z80periph] documents the CTC, DMA, SIO and PIO
chips, and [z80.info] includes many manuals, datasheets and programming
tutorials related to these devices.


CTC
---

Devices include the Z8430, Z84C30, Z84C300s, etc. (_s_ indicates a clock
speed.)

Global I/O includes:
- `CLK`: system clock input
- `I̅N̅T̅`, `I̅O̅R̅Q̅`, `IEI`, `IEO`: Z80 mode 2 interrupt control and daisy-chaining.
- `A₁`/`A₀` or `CS₁`/`CS₀` for address selection
- Data bus and other signals for handling reads/writes.

The CTC has four channels, 0 through 3, each which has:
- A `CLK/TRGₙ` input pin. Pulses are asynchronous, but must have a width of
  at least twice the `CLK` period and lead a `CLK` rising edge by at least
  1/2 clock cycle. Pulses take effect on the 2nd rising edge after
  `CLK/TRG` is asserted.
- A `ZC/TOₙ` zero-count/timeout output pin (excepting channel 3).
- Internal registers for the control word, an 8-bit time constant (1-256),
  an 8-bit down-counter and a prescaler dividing by 16 or 256.

At power up the CTC state is unstable and a `R̅E̅S̅E̅T̅` signal must be
provided. This stops all down-counters, disables all interrupts, and all
`ZC/TO` and interrupt outputs go inactive. All channels must be completely
reprogrammed after this. (Any individual channel can also be reset through
software; see below.)

Each channel has an associated address selected with `A₁`/`A₀`. Reads from
the address read the down-counter contents. Writes to the address write a
control word and, depending on the control word, an optional value in a
second write.

A channel is configured two one of two modes:
0. __Timer mode.__ The timing source is the system clock divided by the
   prescaler (÷16 or ÷256) which decrements the down-counter for every
   clock cycle. The down-counter start method is selected via bit 3 TIMER
   TRIGGER of the control word to be immediate when the time constant is
   loaded or when a high pulse is received on the channel's `CLK/TRG`
   input (see above for timing).
1. __Counter mode:__ The timing source is pulses on the `CLK/TRG` input
   associated with that channel (see above for timing); each pulse
   decrements the down-counter.

In either case, when the down counter reaches zero a positive-going pulse
(about one clock cycle long) is generated on the channel's `ZC/TO` output
and, if configured, an interrupt is generated..

### Channel Programming

Bit 0 of a write indicates whether an interrupt vector word or control
word is being written.

Interrupt vectors are given as the base address of an array of four words
for channels 0, 1, 2 and 3 respectively.

    Bits  Setting
    ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    b7-3  5 MSbits of interrupt vector base (8-byte aligned)
    b2-1  ignored (internally, channel identifier 0-3)
     b0   =1 for Interrupt Vector Word

The control word is a byte with the following format:

    Bit  Setting              0 ── Value ── 1
    ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
     b7  Interrupt         disabled      enabled
     b6  Mode              timer         counter
     b5  Prescaler Value   ÷16           ÷256
     b4  CLK/TRG Edge      falling       rising
     b3  Timer Trigger     autostart     CLK/TRG pulse
     b2  Time Constant     not provided  time constant follows
     b1  Reset             continue      software reset
     b0  Word Type         chan.control  -

If `b2=1` above, the next write must be an 8-bit time constant to load into
the time constant register for that channel. (0 = time constant 256.)

### Interrupts

Any channel can generate an interrupt on timeout; for channel 3 this is the
only output option. Interrupts must be used in Z80 mode 2. When a channel
is configured to interrupt, `I̅N̅T̅` is lowered at the zero count, the Z80
acks with `M̅1̅` and `I̅O̅R̅Q̅`, and the CTC places the configured interrupt
vector on the bus. The CTC then waits to see an `rti` instruction and
presents any further waiting interrupts. The channels are prioritised in
the standard Z80 fashion with channel 0 at highest and channel 3 at lowest
priority.


PIO
---

The device has four addresses controlled by the `C/D̅` and `B/A̅` signals,
typically connected to A0 and A1 on the address bus, giving:

    A1=B/A̅    A0=C/D̅    Address     Function
    ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
       0         0        $00       port A data
       0         1        $01       port A control
       1         0        $02       port B data
       1         1        $03       port B control

Writing to the control register with b0=0 set the interrupt vector to
the value in b7-1. With b0=1 this set s the operating mode:


    b3-0  Mode Word Operation
    ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    1111  Set operating mode
    $xF     b7-6    00  output                      $0F
                    01  input                       $4F
                    10  bidirectional               $8F
                    11  control; I/O word follows   $CF
                        I/O word b7-0: 1=input, 0=output
            b5-4    (ignored)
    ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    0111  Set interrupt control word
    $x7     b7      1   enable interrupt
            b6      ?   and/or
            b5      ?   high low
            b4      1   mask follows in next write (mask bits b7-0)
    ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────



SIO
---

This has aynchronous, synchronous and SDLC/HDLC modes;
this summary focuses primarily on async operation.

Three general operation modes:
- Polled: disable all SIO interrupts and read RR0. D0=1 is receive
  available; D2=1 is transmit available.
- Interrupts:
  - In order of priority: chA recieve, transmit, external/status, chB
    receive, transmit, external/status (e.g. underrun etc.).
  - Can interrupt on first receive char, all receive char, special receive
    condition (e.g. SDLC end of frame).
- CPU or DMA Block Transfer.

The device has four addresses controlled by the `C/D̅` and `B/A̅` signals,
typically connected to A0 and A1 on the address bus, giving:

    A1=B/A̅    A0=C/D̅    Address     Function
    ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
       0         0        $00       channel A data
       0         1        $01       channel A command
       1         0        $02       channel B data
       1         1        $03       channel B command

After reset, reads/writes to the command port read/write RR0/WR0. Writing a
non-zero value for b2-0 to WR0 will temporarily change the state so that
the next read/write will be to the specified RR1-2/WR1-7 register.
(Read registers p.292 P.312; write registers p.272 P.292.)

    RR0   TX/RX buffer status, interrupt status, external status.
          b7    1  break or abort sequence detected
          b6    1  transmit underrun
          b5    ?  CTS (negative logic?)
          b4    1  sync hunt / buffer empty
          b3    ?  DCD (negative logic?)
          b2    1  TX buffer empty
          b1    1  interrupt pending (readable on chA only; chB always 0)
          b0    1  RX char available; reset when RX FIFO empty

    RR1   Special receive condition status.

    RR2   Modified interrupt vector (channel B only).

    WR0   Register pointers, CRC init, mode init, more.
          b7-6     00  null code (no action)
                   01  reset RX CRC checker
                   10  reset TX CRC checker
                   11  reset TX underrun/EOM latch
          b5-3    000  null code (no action)
                  001  send abort (SDLC/HDLC)
                  010  reset ext/status interrupts
                  011  channel reset
                  100  enable INT on next Ax character
                  101  reset TxINT pending
                  110  error reset
                  111  return from INT (chA only)
          b2-0    000  no further action
                  nnn  next write/read from register RW1-7/RR0-2

    WR1     TX/RX interrupt; data transfer mode definition.
    WR2     Interrupt vector (channel B only)
    WR3     RX parameters and controls.
    WR4     TX/RX misc. parameters and modes.
    WR5     TX parameters and controls.
    WR6     Sync character or SDLC address field.
    WR7     Sync character or SDLC flag.



<!-------------------------------------------------------------------->
[z80.info]: http://z80.info
[z80periph]: http://www.z80.info/zip/um0081.pdf
