MSX ROM
=======

Contents:
- Memory Map
- Startup
- Interrupts
- Hooks

References:
- \[td1] [_MSX Technical Data Book_][td1], Sony, 1984.


Memory Map
----------

    F380-FFFF  3200b  BIOS work area
    F1C9-F37F   439b  Disk communication area (fixed)
    HIMEM             Disk work area
                      BASIC work area (see bastech.md)
    BOTTOM            [usu. $8000] $00 byte before start of BASIC text
    01B6-7FFF         Main BIOS and BASIC (always slot 0 or 0-0)
    0000        438b  Jumps to main BIOS routines

#### System Variables and Work Area

See MSX Wiki, [System variables and work area][sysvars]. A few of the
important ones for BASIC are also listed in [`bastech.md`](bastech.md).

    FCB0  1b  OLDSCR  old screen mode
    FCAF  1b  SCRMOD  current screen mode


Startup
-------

On boot the BIOS and BASIC will initialise the system, find RAM to map to
pages 3 and 4, and search for additional ROM ("Sub-ROM") for expansion
devices. Each primary slot and its expanded slots (if present) are scanned
in order, first for RAM and then for ROM. ([[td1]] p.162)
1. Scan at $8000, $C000 and, if the $C000 scan failed, $E000 (to support 8K
   systems) to detect RAM, mapping in the first RAM that it finds for each
   page.
2. Scan at page 1 ($4000) and 2 ($8000) for a cartridge ROM header ($A1A2,
   ASCII `AB`; see below). If present and `INIT` is not $0000, the ROM is
   mapped into its page and `INIT` is called. Note that ROM routines may be
   called multiple times in different locations if the ROM is not fully
   decoded (i.e., mirrored), such as openMSX does with 16K ROMs.

If no program cartridge takes over from `INIT`, Disk BASIC or BASIC will be
started. ([[td1]] p.255)
- The disk ROM checks `H.STKE` after allocating all buffers; if it's not
  $C9 (`ret`) it assumes a ROM cartridge wants control at this point, sets
  up the Disk BASIC environment, and does a `jmp` to the hook.
- If a cartridge BASIC program (`STATEMENT`) is present, it will be
  executed, otherwise the system will go to the BASIC prompt.
- Track 0 sector 0 can be read, it is read to $C000-$C0FF. If this succeeds
  and the first byte of the sector is $EB or $E9, it calls $C01E with carry
  set. (XXX fill in the rest here from [[td1]] at some point.)

To run cartridge code again after initialisation is complete (e.g., to have
disk support), do one of:
- Replace `H.STKE` hook with your code during `INIT`. `H.STKE` is at $FEDA
  and has five bytes available; see "Hooks" below for more info. (I've seen
  `H.CLEA` also used, but that's not documented in [[td1]].)
- Use a cartridge BASIC program (`STATEMENT`) that calls machine language
  following it: `10 DEFUSR=&h8024:?USR(0)`
- See MSX Wiki [Create a ROM with disks support] for examples.

### ROM Header

A primary/expanded slot page containing ROM may contain a header the BIOS
will use on startup to initialise the cartridge's functionality. The
offsets from the start of the page and their values are below. All unused
and reserved values must be set to $0000. Only `INIT` is called at startup.

Note that ROM routines may be called multiple times in different locations
if the ROM is not fully decoded (i.e., mirrored), such as openMSX does with
16K ROMs.

- `$00 ID`: ROM signature; $4142 (ASCII `AB`)
- `$02 INIT`: Hardware/memory initialisation routine ($0000 = not present);
  called by Main-BIOS on system startup after the RAM scan. C register
  contains slot number in standard BIOS form `F000SSPP` (F=1 if secondary
  slot `SS` is specified; `PP`=primary slot). See [[cr init]] for enabling
  the other slot with 32K ROM carts. Application cartridges may take over
  the system when this is called or `ret` to continue standard startup.
- `$04 STATEMENT`: MSX-BASIC `CALL` invokes this to find functionality
  added to BASIC. ($0000 = not present.) Routine must be in page 1. See
  [[td1]] p.163 and [[cr statement]] for details.
- `$06 DEVICE`: Routine to control a device built into the cartridge;
  called by BASIC when it encounters an unknown device name in `OPEN`.
  ($0000 = not present.) Routine must be in page 1. See [[cr device]] for
  details.
- `$08`: Program text (with leading $00) start address for tokenized BASIC
  program executed at startup. ($0000 = not present.) If present, must be
  in page 1 ($8000-$BFFF). System sets `BASROM` when running this and
  disables Ctrl-STOP (XXX confirm this). See [[cr text]] for a technique
  to shift RAM BASIC text past the header and create a ROM image file
  for this.
- `$0A`-`$0F`: 6 bytes reserved for future use.

References:
- [[td1]] p.162-164
- MSX Wiki, [Develop a program in cartridge ROM][cr].


Interrupts
----------

NMI is unused by the ROM, but a RAM hook is provided. It cannot be used
under MSX-DOS because the entry vector $66 is used for DOS FCB data.

INT can be generated by cartridges and the VDP. ROM configures the VDP to
supply 60 Hz interrupts (50 Hz on PAL systems). Keyboard scan is part of
this interrupt processing.


Hooks
-----

$FD9A-$FFC9 ([[td1]] p.147-160) contains a sequence of 5-byte entries for
hooks to modify/override BIOS and BASIC behaviour. These are `call`ed from
ROM at appropriate points. Unused hooks are initialised to 5× $C9 `ret`
instructions at startup.

[[td1]] p.166 gives an example of setup for a cross-slot call:

    HOOKxx: RST 6                   ; $0030 CALLF
            DB <slot-address>       ; FxxxSSPP
            DW <memory-address>
            RET

BIOS Calls
----------

References:
- \[map bios] MSX Assembly Page, [MSX BIOS Calls][map bios]
- \[td1] [_MSX Technical Data Book_][td1], p.110-134
- \[td2] MSX2-Technical-Handbook [Appendix 1 - BIOS Listing][2th a1] (incomplete)
- \[qest] [_MSX BIOS: The Complete MSX BASIC I/O Listing,_][msxbios],
  Qest Publishing, 1985-01 (Steven M. Ting).
- \[msxsyssrc] Sourceforge, [msxsyssrc]: MSX system sourcefiles
  (commented disassembly)

BIOS calls are at ROM addresses starting at $0000. Below this table are
further details on some of these, including discussion of names.

    RST0   000  RESET     Z80 reset entry point; init system
           004  CGTABL    Pointer to ROM character table
           006  VDPREAD   I/O port to use for direct read/write
           007  VDPWRITE    to VDP (TMS9918), usu. $98
    RST1   008  SYNCHR
           00C  RDSLT
    RST2   010  CHRGTR
           014  WRSLT
    RST3   018  OUTDO
           01C  CALSLT
    RST4   020  DCOMPR
           024  ENASLT
    RST5   028  GETYPR
    RST6   030  CALLF
    RST7   038  KEYINT    Timer interrupt handler; keyboard scan etc.
           03B  INITIO
           03E  INIFNK    Re-initialise function key strings to default values
           041  DISSCR
           044  ENASCR
           ...            (all? at 3-byte boundaries)
           059  LDIRMV    block xfer to memory from VRAM
           05C  LDIRVM    block xfer to VRAM from memory
           ...
           159  CALBAS    inter-slot call to BASIC interpreter

    MSX2   15C  SUBROM
           15F  EXTROM
           ...
           177  NWRVRM

    MSX2+  17A  RDRES
           17D  WRRES

    turboR 180  CHGCPU
           183  GETCPU
           186  PCMPLY
           189  PCMREC

- `RST0` $000 `RESET`: Z80 CPU reset entry vector. Called `CHKRAM` in
  [[td1 p.110]] and [[td2 p.343]] and elsewhere, but actually disables
  interrupts and calls the real `CHKRAM` (MSX1 $02D7, MSX2 $0416). Both
  [[td1]] and [[td2]] say that `INIT` must be called afterwards, but
  `CHKRAM` itself does this. Other names:
  - [[qest p.2 P.6]]: `BEGIN`
  - [[map bios]]: `STARTUP`, `RESET`, `BOOT`

- $059 `LDIRMV`, $05C `LDIRVM`: block xfer memory←VRAM, VRAM←memory.
  BC=block length, DE=source start addr, HL=dest start addr.



<!-------------------------------------------------------------------->
[td1]: https://archive.org/stream/MSXTechnicalHandbookBySony#page/n5/mode/1up

<!-- Memory Map -->
[sysvars]: https://www.msx.org/wiki/System_variables_and_work_area

<!-- Startup -->
[cr]: https://www.msx.org/wiki/Develop_a_program_in_cartridge_ROM
[cr device]: https://www.msx.org/wiki/Develop_a_program_in_cartridge_ROM#DEVICE
[cr disk]: https://www.msx.org/wiki/Develop_a_program_in_cartridge_ROM#Create_a_ROM_with_disks_support
[cr init]: https://www.msx.org/wiki/Develop_a_program_in_cartridge_ROM#INIT
[cr statement]: https://www.msx.org/wiki/Develop_a_program_in_cartridge_ROM#STATEMENT
[cr text]: https://www.msx.org/wiki/Develop_a_program_in_cartridge_ROM#TEXT

<!-- BIOS Calls -->
[2th a1]: https://github.com/Konamiman/MSX2-Technical-Handbook/blob/master/md/Appendix1.md
[map bios]: http://map.grauw.nl/resources/msxbios.php
[msxsyssrc]: https://sourceforge.net/projects/msxsyssrc/
[qest]: https://archive.org/details/MSXBIOSBook/MSX%20BIOS%20Book%20-%2001/mode/1up
