Motorola MC6820/6821 Peripheral Interface Adapter (PIA)
=======================================================

The [MC6820], MC6821 and MOS MCS6520 are identical in operation but
with slightly different electrical characteristics. Similar chips with
more functionality include the 6532 RIOT, 6530 RRIOT, [MOS 6522 VIA][6522],
and MOS 6526 CIA. Material here is taken from the 1985 [MC6821 data
sheet][data] and [ciarcia-8608][] (_Byte_ 1986-08) unless otherwise
noted.

### Electrical Characteristics

The 6821 ports have different electrical characteristics:
- Port A has internal pullups to allow it to drive CMOS inputs (min
  3.5 V for high, rather than TTL 2.7 V). These are always connected
  so the port will sink more chip current even when used as an input.
- Port B uses standard totem-pole outputs and will float (tri-state)
  any pins set to input mode.
- Port A reads in output mode will read the current state of the pin,
  which may not be the written state if an external device is pulling
  the line low.
- Port B reads in output mode will read a latch with the last-written
  output, not the current level of the pins themselves.

The 6821 port A can drive 2 TTL loads output and has max. 1.5 TTL
loads as input. The 6820 has much lower figures for both, so the 6820
is better for input from limited-drive devices, but the 6821 better
for output needing higher drive.

The 6822 (not to be confused with the 6522 VIA!) is similar to the 6821
but has open-drain outputs that can withstand 15 V (or even 18 V).

The 6520 PIA drives one TTL load, and port A input load is 1 TTL. The
6522 VIA is the same electrically, though it also adds the timers etc.
It also has tighter timing tolerances. The 6526 CIA adds even more
features, including a TOD clock run from 50/60 Hz input.

### Pinout

(Pin header notes at [`8bit/conn/header`](../8bit/conn/header.md).)

           +---__---+
       Vss | 1    40| CA1
       PA0 | 2    39| CA2
       PA1 | 3    38| /IRQA →
       PA2 | 4    37| /IRQB →
       PA3 | 5    36| RS0   ←
       PA4 | 6    35| RS1   ←
       PA5 | 7    34| /RSET ←
       PA6 | 8    33| D0    ↔
       PA7 | 9    32| D1    ↔
       PB0 |10    31| D2    ↔
       PB1 |11    30| D3    ↔
       PB2 |12    29| D4    ↔
       PB3 |13    28| D5    ↔
       PB4 |14    27| D6    ↔
       PB5 |15    26| D7    ↔
       PB6 |16    25| E     ←   Φ2 ?
       PB7 |17    24| CS1   ←
       CB1 |18    23| /CS2  ←
       CB2 |19    22| CS0   ←
       Vcc |20    21| R/W̅   ←
           +--------+

- Ports `A` and `B` substitute for `x` below
- `Px0‥Px7`: GPIO pins
- `Cx1`: interrupt input (optionally generates interrupt output)
- `/IRQx`: interrupt output (may be disabled)
- `Cx2`: interrupt input or control output

Reset sets all registers to 0.

Registers addressed by `RS1`, `RS0`:

      0     Port A direction/data (DDR, DR)
      1     Port A control register (CRA)
      2     Port B direction/data (DDR, DR)
      3     Port B control register (CRB)

The direction register is enabled when bit 2 of the CR is 0. Write `0`
for input, `1` for output. CR bit 2 = 1 enables data register.
- Port A input pins have a 1.5 TTL load internal pullup. Reads of
  output pins reads the voltage on the pin: >2.0V → 1, <0.8V → 0. This
  will not match the output data bit if the line is loaded.
- Port B input pins are high-impedence (tri-state). Outputs read the
  value written to the data register. (Confirm!)

Control register CRA (CRB is parallel functionality except where indicated):

      Bit   Function
       7    IRQA1 flag: goes high on CA1 transition; cleared by DR (A) read
       6    IRQA2 flag: CA2=input: like IRQA1.  CA2=output: 0
       5    CA2 direction: 0=input, 1=output
       4    depends on bit 5
       3    depends on bit 5
       2    0=DDR selected; 1=data register selected
       1    IRQ1A set by CA1 transition direction: 0=↓; 1=↑
       0    /IRQA pin asserted on CA1 active transition: 0=disable; 1=enable
            (When b0 changed 0→1, immediate /IRQA if IRQ1A is set)

The IRQA1 (b7) and IRQA2 (b6) flags are set based on b1 and b5/b4
respectively, even when the interrupt output pins `/IRQA` and `/IRQB`
are disabled. They are cleared by reading the data register; do this
even if the port is an output port.

- b5: 0=CA2 (CB2) is an input
  - b4: CA2 transition to set IRQA2 flag: 0=↓ 1=↑
  - b3: CA2 /IRQA output asserted when IRQA2 set: 0=disable 1=enable
- b5: 1=CA2 (CB2) is an output
  - b4=1: CA2 output is b3 value
  - b4=0: Differs for CA2 and CB2
    - __CA2__ strobe on data register DR A __read__
      - b3=0: read strobe with CA1 restore
        - goes low on first E↓ after read of DRA
        - returned high by next CA1 transition specified by b1
      - CA2 b3=1: read strobe with E restore
        - goes low on first E↓ after read of DRA
        - returned high by next E↓ during deselect
    - __CB2__ strobe on data register DR B __write__
      - b3=0: write strobe with CB1 restore
        - goes low on first E↑ after write to DRA
        - returned high by next CB1 transition specified by b1,
          but CRB-b7 must first be cleared by read of data
      - b3=1: write strobe with E restore
        - goes low on first E↑ after write to DRA
        - returned high by next E↑ following E pulse while deselected


Packaging
---------

40-pin DIP with a ceramic (L suffix), CERDIP (S) or plastic (P)
package. 1.0 MHz, 1.5 Mhz (A) and 2.0 MHz (B) versions.



<!-------------------------------------------------------------------->
[6522]: https://cdn.datasheetspdf.com/pdf-down/6/5/2/6522-Commodore.pdf
[MC6820]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peripheral_Interface_Adapter
[ciarcia-8608]: https://archive.org/details/eu_BYTE-1986-08_OCR/page/n112/mode/1up
[data]: https://embed.widencdn.net/pdf/plus/rocelec/j3bd72akh4/RE_DSHEET_MC6821-A21-B21_REI.pdf?u=5oefqw
