X11 Notes
=========


Display Manager
---------------

[Note: This has been checked only against Debian.]

* The DM the login screen.
* Its Debian apt package will provide `x-display-manager`.
* `xdm` is the original old-school one.
* [`lightdm`], from freedesktop.org, is the usual default.

#### LightDM

LightdDM uses "greeters" to determine how to display the login screen.
They're found in `/usr/share/xgreeters/*.desktop`. Debian+Xfce uses
the GTK greeter. Ubuntu uses the Unity greeter. The [Ubuntu wiki
page][uw-lightdm] provides lots of good info on LightDM.

### Choosing a Session

LightDM with the GTK greeter gives me a drop-down to choose the
session; I have:

* Default Xsession
* Fvwm
* Xfce Session


Session Startup
---------------

The "Xfce Session" option in the Display Manager section above
presumably does whatever Xfce normally does.

The "Fvwm" option seems to run a "pure" Fvwm 2 configuration that does
not appear to run `.xsession` or `.xinitrc`, presumably relying on
`.fvwm/config` to do all the setup. The environment for this includes

    DESKTOP_SESSION=fvwm
    XGD_SESSION_DESKTOP=fvwm
    GTK_IM_MODULE=xim
    GDM_SESSION=fvwm

I use `Default Xsession` which does run `.xsession` (mine sources
`.profile` and then execs `.xinitrc`) and give me an environment with:

    DESKTOP_SESSION=lightdm-xsession
    XGD_SESSION_DESKTOP=fvwmlightdm-xsession
    XDG_CURRENT_DESKTOP=XFCE
    GTK_IM_MODULE=ibus
    GDM_SESSION=fvwmlightdm-xsession

Though I'm using `xfce4-panel` I don't use the Xfce session manager
or desktop; I just run `fvwm` at the end of my `.xinitrc`.

#### Other Information

The `startx(1)` manpage.

The [Ubuntu Wiki Session Startup][uw-ses-start] page has little
useful information and seems to be GDM-specific.


Links
-----

(These are visible only in the Markdown source.)

[`lightdm`]: https://freedesktop.org/wiki/Software/LightDM/
[uw-lightdm]: https://wiki.ubuntu.com/LightDM
[uw-ses-start]: https://wiki.ubuntu.com/X/Config/SessionStartup
