Rigol DS1000Z Series (1054Z) Oscilloscope Notes
===============================================

### Settings Reset/Save/Load

`Utility → System → Power Set` determines whether at power-up the
'scope starts with `Last` settings from before power-off (default) or
factory `Default` settings. The factory default settings (described in
detail on page 14-12 of the manual) can also be restored at any time
with `Storage → Default`.

Current settings can be saved and reloaded as "Setup" (`.stp`) files
in internal or USB storage via `Storage → Storage → Setups`. Note that
"Parameters"/"Param" (`.txt`) format also records setup and other
'scope information but cannot be reloaded.

### Preferences/Settings

`Utility → System → Vertical Ref` determines whether vertical scale
zooms around `Ground` of signal (default) or `Center` of screen.

`Display` menu offers vector/dot display, persistence time
(longer/infinite good for checking for noise/jitter/glitches),
waveform intensity for persistence, grid display/brightness.

`Measure → Font Size` sets size of measurements display at screen
bottom. May need `Sel Item` to switch between displayed stats.


UI Hints
--------

- Use `Measure → Clear → ItemX → Delete` to gray out bottom-line
  measurements to be the first to be removed when new ones are added.
  See "Measurement" below for more details on handling this.
- To use vertical scale controls for the Math channel, you need to
  press `MATH` _twice_, to be not in the top level math menu but the
  "Math" menu below that..


Printing
--------

The print button will create a `DS1Z_QuickPrint#.png` file where `#` is the
lowest number starting from `1` that is not already on the USB disk. The
file will always dated 2014-11-01 21:00:00.


Triggering
----------

Triggering and trigger status display (at upper left):
- _Single_ waits for trigger condition, triggers once, and stops. (`STOP`)
- _Normal_ retriggers every time it sees the trigger condition, stopping
  when it doesn't see it. (`WAIT` and `T'D`)
- _Auto_ forces a trigger if it doesn't see a trigger condition. (`AUTO`
  and `T'D`) XXX How long does it scan before forcing?
- _Force_ button forces a single capture (except when stopped) continuing
  in that mode after.

Trigger coupling (Menu/Setting/Coupling), valid only with edge triggers,
can be set to DC/AC/LFR/HFR independently of the input coupling:
- `DC`
- `AC`: blocks all DC components, attenuates signals < 75 Hz.
- `LFR` (LF reject): blocks DC components, rejects LF < 75 kHz.
- `HFR` (HF reject): rejects high frequency components > 75 kHz.


Measurement
-----------

Hardware frequency counter at upper right; source channel set via
`Measure → Source`.

Left-hand buttons for quick measuresments; `Measure` menu for more
sophisticated stuff including:
- `Range → Region` to measure full screen or within cursors only.
- `Delay` and `Phase` for cross-channel measurements.
- `Threshold` (min/mid/max def. 10%/50%/90%) for all time/delay/phase params.
- `Statistic` to enable stats (`Extremum` for cur/avg/min/max;
  `Difference` for cur/avg/deviation/count; `Reset` to clear stat history).

Real-time graph and table history of measurement values is available
from `Measure → History`.

#### Clearing Measurements

To delete measurements created from the left-hand buttons, use
`Measure → Clear → ItemX → Delete` to grey out the measurement; the
greyed-out measurements will slowly be pushed off the screen as you
add new measurements. The `Recover` item in that deepest menu will
restore a measurement, allowing you to bring back ones used previously
in the current session if you've cleared the screen of the bottom
measurements for a while.

Pressing and holding `Measure` or `Measure → Clear → All Items` will
turn off bottom measurement display completely. Doing that again will
recover all items, or you can recover them individually as above. A
clear plus one or two recoveries can be faster than individual
deletions.
