pyinfra
=======

[pyinfra][] ([docs]) updates the configurations of Unix hosts, similar to
[Ansible] or [Progress Chef].
* pyinfra uses some terms, such as 'group,' that look similar to other
  tools but are significantly different concepts.
* The configuration language is Python rather than Ansible's YAML which can
  make sophisticated configuration easier.
* Its 'connector' concept can make connectivity and testing easier (e.g.,
  it can configure Docker/Podman containers directly).

### Invocation

Run with:

    pyinfra [OPTIONS] INVENTORY OPERATIONS

_Inventory_ is a comma-separated list of ad-hoc hostnames or, more
typically, a `.py` file that generates a list of hosts and additional
configuration data. _Operations_ is an ad-hoc command (see below) or a
`.py` file containing commands to be applied to each host. (The commands
are intended to be idempotent.)

Any Python exceptions not caught by the Python code itself will cause the
full traceback to be written to `pyinfra-debug.log` in the CWD. Don't
accidentally commit this.

pyinfra runs in [5 stages]:
- Setup: read the inventory/data.
- Connect: connect to each host generated by the inventory; pyinfra will
  continue only with hosts that connect successfully.
- Prepare: detect changes (including getting [facts]) and determine operation
  order.
- Execute: run the operations. (Note that [facts] are not updated by
  operations.)
- Disconnect and cleanup (including removing containers it created).


Inventory
---------

References:
- [Inventory & Data]

pyinfra does its operations on every host in the inventory unless given one
or more [`--limit`] options. The _INVENTORY_ command line parameter that
generates the inventory may be an ad-hoc list (that generates just host
names, and no associated data except that from `group_data/GROUP.py` files)
or a Python file typically called `inventory.py`.

Giving an ad-hoc comma-separated list is not recommended; the host(s) will
not have the associated data set up in `inventory.py` but only that
supplied by options on the command line. (Use `--limit` to operate against
a subset of hosts.)

The _inventory_ is a set of host names (possibly qualified with a
connector; see below) and associated _data_ which are key-value
dictionaries. Looking up data for a host will search the following in
order:
- Override data supplied as command line parameters.
- Host data (associated with the individual host).
- Group data asscoiated with the group to which the host is assigned. This
  is the merge of data assigned to groups directly in an `inventory.py`
  file and all module variables set in a `group_data/GROUP.py` file.
- Global data, which is that associated with the `all` group (including
  `group_data/all.py`).

Each variable set by `inventory.py` whose name does not start with `_` and
is a `list` or `tuple` is a group name: the elements are hosts in that
group. The values may be a 2-tuple `([host,…], data:dict)` where the second
element is group data, or just `[host,…]`. In both cases a _host_ is either
a string that is the hostname, or a 2-tuple of a hostname and a `dict` of
host data.

    hostnames_only          = ['one', 'two']
    hostnames_onewithdata   = ['three', ('four', { 'a':1 })]
    groupdata               = [['five', 'six'], { 'g':42 }]
    hostandgroupdata        = [[('seven', {'s':7}), 'eight'], { 'e':8 }]

#### Hostnames

Hostnames in `@CONNECTOR/…` form use the given [connector][] (which must be
an _execution connector_), otherwise they are passed as arguments to the
`@ssh/` connector.
- `@local`: the current host
- `@chroot`
- [`@ssh`]: SSH connection (the default connector). Data may include
  `ssh_port`, `ssh_user` and `ssh_key` (SSH key filename) amongst other
  settings.
- `@docker/NAME`: Run against Docker container _name,_ if present (starting
  it if necessary), otherwise create a new container from image _name_
  using `docker run -d NAME tail -f /dev/null`.
- `@dockerssh/HOST:NAME`: As the Docker connector above, but against the
  docker container named _name_ on remote _host_ via ssh login.
- `@podman/NAME`, `@podmanssh/HOST:NAME`: Similar to the Docker connectors
  above.
- `@terraform`: Use Terraform to generate a hostname for use with the SSH
  connector.

pyinfra defaults to using ssh to connect to most target hosts. This can be
configured with `ssh_port`, `ssh_user`, and `ssh_key` in the settings
dictionary; see [pyinfra ssh keys].

pyinfra will try to connect to each host during the 'connect' stage and
drop from the update list any hosts to which it cannot connect.

#### Host Data

The `data` property of `pyinfra.host` is not a dictionary of the
properties. Use `.get('PROPNAME')` to get a property, or `.dict()` to
generate a dictionary of the current properties.

Note that `group_data/all.py` and `group_data/GROUP.py` files will add
_all_ variables set in that module to the properties, including even
functions.


Operations
----------

For each host specified by the inventory, either the `.py` file or the
ad-hoc operation is run with the `pyinfra.host` (you must import this)
variable set to each host/data/etc. in turn. [ad-hoc operations] are not
Python; they are `fact`, `exec` or an operation name followed by space
separated arguments, see [cli].

Two variables may be imported from `pyinfra`:
- [`host`] has properties to access the host information defined for that
  host by the _INVENTORY_ argument and the `group_data/` files.
- [`operations`] has properties to set the system configuration, e.g.,
  setting the hostname, adding users, editing files, etc.

Note that `pyinfra.host.get_fact()` returns fact set at the start of the
run; operations will never update these.



<!-------------------------------------------------------------------->
[Ansible]: ./ansible/README.md
[Progress Chef]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Progress_Chef
[pyinfra]: https://pyinfra.com

[5 stages]: https://docs.pyinfra.com/en/3.x/deploy-process.html
[Inventory & Data]: https://docs.pyinfra.com/en/3.x/inventory-data.html
[`--limit`]: https://docs.pyinfra.com/en/3.x/cli.html#limit
[`@ssh`]: https://docs.pyinfra.com/en/3.x/connectors/ssh.html
[ad-hoc operations]: https://docs.pyinfra.com/en/3.x/cli.html
[cli]: https://docs.pyinfra.com/en/3.x/cli.html
[connector]: https://docs.pyinfra.com/en/3.x/connectors.html
[docs]: https://docs.pyinfra.com/en/3.x/index.html
[facts]: https://docs.pyinfra.com/en/3.x/facts.html
[operations]: https://docs.pyinfra.com/en/3.x/operations.html
